\section{Conclusion}\label{sec:conclusion}

We went into detail about the response functions in correlated financial
markets. We define the trade time scale and physical time scale to compute the
self- and cross-response functions for six companies with the largest average
market capitalization for three different economic sectors of the S\&P index
in 2008.
Due to the characteristics of the data used, we had to classify and sampling
values to obtain the corresponding values in different time scales.
The classification and sampling of the data had impact on the results, making
them smoother or stronger, but always keeping their shape and behavior.

The response functions were analyzed according to the time scales. For trade
time scale, the signal is weaker due to the large averaging values from all the
trades in a year. In the physical time scale, the response functions had less
noise and their signal were stronger. The activity in every second highly
impact the responses. As the response functions can not grow indefinitely with
the time lag, they increase to a peak, to then decrease. It can be seen that
the market needs time to react and revert the growing. In both time scale cases
depending on the stocks, two characteristics behavior were shown. In one, the
time lag was large enough to show the complete increase-decrease behavior. In
the other case, the time lag was not enough, so some stocks only showed the
growing behavior.

We modify the response function to add a time shift parameter. With this
parameter we wanted to analyze the importance in the order of the relation
between returns and trade signs. In trade time scale and physical time scale we
found similar results. When we shift the order between returns and trade signs,
the information from the relation between them is temporarily lost and as
outcome the signal does not have any meaningful information. When the order is
recovered, the response function grows again, showing the expected shape.
We showed that this is not an isolated conduct, and that all the shares used in
our analysis exhibit the same behavior. Thus, even if they are values of time
shift that can give a response function signal, from the theory this time shift
should be a value between $t_{s} = [0,2]$.

Finally, we analyzed the impact of the time lag in the response functions. We
divided the time lag in a short and long time lag. The response function that
depended on the short time lag, showed a stronger response. The long response
function depending on the stock could take negative and non-negative values.
However, in general the influence were not intense.